# Project Lake Tahoe West
Forests are complex, spatially and temporally dynamic, and subject to competition, succession, and disturbance processes that result in complex patterns across the larger landscape.  Strategic management of a forest considers the forest’s ability to provide multiple ecosystem services through time, and such management must consider the consequences of climate change on those forests and their provision of services.  Complicating management further is the interactions of climate, disturbance (fire, pathogen, etc.), and the management activities that can influence those processes.  

These challenges are amplified within the Lake Tahoe Basin (LTB), a ~70,000 ha forested landscape surrounding the lake that covers montane to sub-alpine forest types in the middle of the Sierra mountain range.  Most of the land is under the management of the USDA Forest Service.

Tools have been developed to help assist with management planning that incorporate all of those factors; mechanistic landscape models can forecast forest conditions through time and inform relative success of various management strategies.  We were tasked with implementing the LANDIS-II forest landscape model in the LTW.  LANDIS-II can generate many useful outputs by itself.  However, many ecosystem services are best represented and forecast within other specialized models.  Therefore, we deployed LANDIS-II as a centralized ‘hub’ for scenario forecasts representing management actions and subsequently provided necessary data for these other models.  Therefore, the full suite of models were all working off the same suite of assumptions about climate, future fire behavior, succession, management, etc.

To maximize the likelihood of success of the project, an iterative and collaborative approach brought together stakeholders, forest managers, resource experts, and scientists.  Iterations focused on the development of management strategies, the implementation of those strategies within LANDIS-II, the forecasting of future conditions under those strategies, and finally the evaluation of those strategies. Through multiple meetings among these groups, four main management scenarios were developed.  These scenarios were intended to ‘pin-the-corners’ of intensities of management, ranging from a limited management but fire suppression heavy approach to a heavy thin approach. 

This project has been generously funded by the US Forest Service beginning in 2017.  We anticipate wrapping up in spring 2019.
